De Roberto Picot ut possit esse sub plegio standi recto

'II. '^114- ^ 379-

1 36 AMERCIAMENT A.

— 2"\ per plegium Ricardi dc Veim, Willclnii Manscl
Radulfi de Reddlee.

De Mirabilia que fuit uxor Helic Hakelot pro sic quod
carta sua inrotuletur — i'".

De Isaac Judeo Gloucestrie ut possit esse sub plegio —
I'", per plegium Abraham de Warrwico, Bpnenfacii filii
Helie, Abraham Folet, Manasses filii Deodonati, Isaac de
Lincolnia, Mosse filii Aaron, Isaac filii Matatie, Isaac filii
Mosse, Benedicti le Gendre.

NOTES.

The first entry is an amercement of two of the coroners; but in A
this is struck out and alibi is written, for the amercement has been
entered elsewhere, namely, at the beginning of the civil business.
Perhaps their default (defalia) consisted in not being present at the
opening of the eyre.

I. Bractonsays (f. 135 b) that at the beginning of each eyre there must
be an inquiry as to the mode in which Englishry is presented, since the
customs of different counties are different. Here is one small proof of
his trustworthiness. There is a similar note of the county custom at the
beginning of other Iter Rolls.

cervisia is constantly used to mean, not ale, but an ale, a feast,
e. g. a bride-ale. See Skeat, bridal.

sectam facere, to make suit or pursuit.

per sectam Matillidis, at the suit of INIatilda.
4. prepositus, the reeve.

rapus, apparently this was the word in common use for rape ;
Bracton uses raptus. See Du Cange, rappus, rapus, etc. Our rape
is not from the Latin rapere (Skeat).

o. invenit hos plegios. Only one pledge is named; probably the
clerk expected a second name. The reader must be prepared for this
sort of thing.

manueapere aliqtiem, to take a person in hand, to undertake to
produce him, to become his manucaptor.

G. attachiare, to take and keep hold of. A man may be attached by
(per) his goods and chattels, as when they are taken as a security for
his appearance, or by {per) another person who becomes surety for him.

7. racionabiliter, duly.

8. abjuravit regnum. For the law about sanctuary and abjuration
of the realm see Bracton (f. 135 b). Abjuration seems to have been
very common.

rettati : rettare or retare (sometimes rectare), to accuse, generally
supposed to be a word of Teutonic origin : but Diez refers to reputare.
I think that in this roll a man is ret tat us when he is of bad fame, although
he has not been indicted iindictatus), or appealed (appcllatus). In
this case certain persons are rettati, but the jurors do not believe in
their guilt.

II. This entry has been confused by the intrusion of a postscript.
/^hvi order is made for the outlawry of Roger; then it appears that two

townships know where he is : then an order is made for his apprehension.

138 NOTES.

Then in Roll A a passage has been interpolated, stating how it was testi-
fied that Roger was not guilty, and how Richard of Clopton made fine
for him ; but the clerk had not room to interpolate the names of Roger's
pledges, so he tells us to see below [plegii ejus stattdi recto inferius) and
finds room for the names at the end of the entry. This procedure is
not uncommon, and the reader must take a general warning that some-
times the end of a case appears before the middle.

"^^ 12. Emma the appellor is dead ; Philip the appellee pays to have an
inquisition and the jurors acquit him. Seemingly he is acquitted by the
samejurors whoare in trouble for not presenting the appeal, namely, the
jurors of Kiftsgate hundred.

15. seeuta fuit ad duos comitatus, she had sued him in two (suc-
cessive) county courts. He could not be outlawed until the fourth, or,
according to another mode of reckoning, until the fifth, county court,
until i, e. he was qiiinto exactiis. See Bracton f. 125 b.
18. rettatus de bursis scissis, accused of cutting purses.

/'20. The story, as told by the county, is this : — Adam sued Clement in
the hundred court for carrying off hay to the value of five shillings,
against the sheriff's peace : Clement's defence was that he bought the hay
from Adam's mother, and it was adjudged in the hundred court that
Clement might make his law, i. e. establish his defence by his oath sup-
ported by the oaths of compurgators : this he was to do in the county
court ; but when he came there with his compurgators {cum lege sua), and
was just going to make his law, Adam attempted to change the charge
into one of felony, mentioned the king's peace instead of the sheriffs,
and declared that Clement was just going to perjure himself and
commit robbery by means of perjury. When the appeal comes before
the justices Clement first (as the fashion is) traverses the whole charge,
then pleads his facts specially, and produces his suit, his witnesses, and
Adam's mother, who is willing to warrant that she sold the hay.
Clement puts himself on a jury for these facts; but there is no need of
a jury, for the justices, having heard what happened in the local courts,
declare that the appeal is null, probably on the ground that Adam by
first suing in the county court has shown that there was no felony ; but
seemingly Adam's case was open to many objections. A very similar
case will be found below No. 99.

'^ Adam levavit eum de lege. It has been suggested to me that

this curious phrase contains a reminiscence of the classical meaning of
elevare. Adam asserted that Clement was not a person who should be
allowed to swear, was not oath-worthy, law-worthy.

Clemens venit et defendit feloniam et paeem, etc. ; the best
translation for defetiderc in such a context is to deny; but of course our
law language, until quite lately, used to defend as equivalent for to deny.
The defendant in trespass defended tort and force and all that was
against the peace.

21, capud thethinge, the chief pledge, head-borough.
. 22. The only case of suicide ; as to which see Bracton, f. 150.

24, 25. The assizes of weights and measures (as to the breadth of

\OTES.

cloth, (it' latitiidiiic paiuwrum, .ind the like), were probably those of
1 197 given in Hovec'.en, vol. iv. p. 33 (Stubbs' cd.).

20. feinario ; fenaria is a barn ; Ducange also gives fenarins, fenerius,
fenerium. I am not sure that I have read the word correctly.

30. careta, cart ; caretarius, carter.

32. cum toto pisce, with all the fish ; chargiata, loaded.

33. Terra Nor manner um. The lands of those Normans who,
when John lost Normandy, chose to be Frenchmen instead of English-
men were forfeited. As to the forfeiture of Pinnockshire see Rot. CI.
i. 5 b ; it is one of the few little districts that long kept the name
of shire.

."5. T'WxsJohn Marshall is probably the nephew of the great Earl and
a distinguished leader among the insurgent barons.

et petit sibi allocari, and asks that this may be allowed him.
This seems the technical phrase for introducing a plea which shows
that the accusation must fail. See Bracton, f. 119, where it occurs
repeatedly. William de la Chambre is not tried ; he pays ten marks,
and finds bail that he will appear in case an appeal is brought. The
charge against him of having murdered Simon of Segre is repeated
in 254 by the jurors of the hundred of Cirencester ; this doubtless is the
explanation of the words in the margin of 35, which I hesitatingly read
as item in Cirencestria.

38. As to the forfeiture of Hayles see Rot. CI. vol. i. 12 ; the same
volume will give facts about this Eudo de la Jalle, or de la Gaile as B
calls him.

40. This is a case of treasure-trove ; but since only five pennies were
found it is treated as trifling.

45. hachia, achia, an axe, hatchet.

49. It was unlawful to change market-day without royal licence, unless
the change was from a Sunday to a week-day. People were beginning
to think that Sunday marketings were wrong. See Hoveden, vol. iv.
pp. 124, 169, as to the preaching of Eustace of Flay.

50. An early case of collusive conveyancing. The tenants on the
king's manor come and sell [venitint et vendujit) their lands to the
monastery or the hospital, and then take back their lands to hold of
the monks or hospitallers. Then, when required to perform their police
duties, e. g. as ale-conners, custodians of the assize of bread and beer,
and the like, they set up the monks' privileges, and the monks excom-
municate the sheriff. The monks probably have charters which free
their tenants from suit to himdred courts and so forth. The imme-
diate recourse to excommunication is very characteristic of the time.
(See Pearson, Hist. vol. ii. p. 55.)

52. The jurors of the borough of Winchcomb say that Mariniis is
accused {rettatus) of homicide ; he pays two marks to have an inquisi-
tion as to his guilt or innocence : then the jurors of two neighbouring
hundreds are called in, and all say distinctly that he is not guilty. He
buys the privilege of being tried by twenty-four jurors in addition to
the twelve vaJio have presented the matter.

140 XOTES.

53. As to killing a thief taken in the act, compare tliis case with 89
and 362. William did not dare to face the legal consequences of his
act ; perhaps he had not caught the thief hand-having. Robert the
parson [persona) cannot be amerced because he is dead.

59. cnipulum, knipulum, canipulum, a knife; it is the English
knife and French canif.

62. archa, a chest, box.

68. The ways which the parson straitened (estredavit) were not
the king's high ways, so there was no purpresture or encroachment on
the king's rights, consequently no plea of the crown. Dicitur autem
purprestura ve! porprestura proprie, quando aliquid super dominum
regem injuste occupatur, Glanvill, lib. ix. cap. 11.

69. Fleta (f. 53, 54) says that a woman can bring an appeal for the
death of her unborn child; Britton (vol. i. p. 114) says that she cannot.
See also Bracton, f. 121, and Stephen, Hist. vol. iii. p. 32. Sir S.
Clarke, in his notes on the first book of Fleta, p. 82, cites a roll of 45
Henry 3 in favour of such an appeal. Clarke's (anonymous) book is
too little known.

71. In A there has been a great deal of correction and interlineation.
Seemingly the appeal was first brought by John Robertson, or, at
least, the clerk supposed that he was the appellor ; but then for his
name that of Nicholas Parent has been substituted, and consequent but
obscure alterations have been made in the description of the goods.
The truth seems to be that Nicholas was in the house as John Robert-
son's farmer, and as such was the proper person to prosecute an appeal
of robbery, even though some of the goods belonged to John, for the
appeal must be brought by the possessor whether owner or not (see
Holmes, Common Law, p. 168). Martin Ball, the appellee, first tra-
verses the whole charge and then pleads that he was acting as servant of
the Abbot of Evesham, that the A^bbot was entitled to possession of the
house, and that John Robertson has brought an assize of novel disseisin
which is pending. The appeal is adjudged null ; the assize will give
John the chattels if he is entitled to them (Glanvill, xiii. 9). It seems to
have been no uncommon thing to attempt to use the appeal of robbery
for the purpose of trying title to land. See 100.

de forcia. The accessories of a principal criminal are his vis and
his forcia ; to appeal a person de facto is to accuse him as principal, to
appeal him de vi or de forcia is to accuse him as accessory (see 87).
The appeal against the principal does not lie {non jacet).
10'° in denariis, ten marks in cash,
jocalia, jewels.

73. Phiiip is an approver [probator) ; he is a confessed thief and
appeals three other persons (see 74, 75) of complicity in his crimes.
The first of these is William, and since William is not in frankpledge,
has no lord to answer for him and simply denies the charge, he is forced
to fight Philip. The case gives a good proof of Bracton's fidelity to his
authorities. He says (f. 152) that a man appealed by an approver of
participation in theft or other felony need not fight if he is in frank-

NOTES. 141

pledge, has a lord who will warrant him {qui ipsuin advocai'erit), and
is willing to put himself on his country that he is a true man. Si autet/i
in dccciiiia nan fiierit nee dominuni liabiierit qui adi'occt euin, et
patriam 7-ccusaverit, forte tunc cum ovinia bona ei dcficiant, et per hoc
par sit appel/anti, proccdat inter eos duelluin. In Bracton's time this
rule, that a man appealed by an approver may go to the country instead
of fighting, was seemingly a survival, since every appellee had choice be-
tween the two modes of trial; but in 1221 this rule about an approver's
appeal may still have been an exception to the general rule that an
appellee must fight.

plegius eorum gaola, let the g.iol be their bail ; this is a neat
phrase in common use.

-The marginal notes which seem to show that Philip began his three
appeals in three different counties are from B, I do not think that
they were in A.

The date of the duel was the fifth of July.

75. quatuor vdnas de blancheto, foiu- ells of blanket.

defendit .... sicut latronem ligatum, he denies in the form
proper to a case in which the appellor is a thief in bonds. See Bracton,
f. 123 b, ^/ ^ itenit et defendit societatem et latrocittimn et totum
.... sicut versus eui>i^ qui est latro et cog7ioscens.

7G. per odium et athiam, of ha; red and malice : athia is our hate.

This appeal fails at every point, so that one cannot say whether the
appellor's coverture was a fatal objection ; see roo.

78. hereia, a harrow ; herciare, to harrow.

79. garcio, a page, a groom.

esgaratare, exgartare, to hamstring; ei. garter.

81. Robert of Gotherington, who is acquitted of this crime, had been
arrested and imprisoned at Gloucester; in 12 19 he paid a mark to the
king and was bailed out to twenty-four lawful men of the county
(Excerpt. Rot. Fin. vol. i. p. 34).

83. et viilata cognovit, and the township confessed that they did
not raise hue and cry, and that no suit was made to the hundred court,
and that they did not report the matter to the coroners.

87. At the outset a question arises as to whom George has appealed as
principal {de facto) and whom as accessory {de vi). It is proved that he
has all along appealed Thomas as principal and Estmar as accessory. A
variance in this matter would have been fatal to the appeal (Bracton,
f. 141); but there has been none. Then George wants to pursue his
appeal as a maimed man (as to this see Bracton, f. 142-143) ; but the
court decides that he is not maimed. Seemingly Thomas wants to be
tried by the country ; the jurors think him guilty, and it is adjudged that
there must be a duel at Hereford on the 21st of July. Then B adds
what happened at Hereford ; Thomas was vanquished, blinded, and muti-
lated. An order was then made for the production of Estmar the
accessory. He was to be produced at Gloucester, which town perhaps
the judges revisited on their return from Hereford. Then follows in B
another postscript, which perhaps tells the slory of a duel at Worcester

142 NOTES.

(which town was certainly revisited) between George and Estinar. But
this is obscure, because, according to the roll, Thomas is again the com-
batant. George is again victorious, and his enemy is blinded and
mutilated.

Possibly the story does not end here though the record does. Under
this very year 1221 the Worcester annalist reports how barbarism was
tempered by miracle. A certain champion [pttgil), by name Thomas of
Elclersfield, was blinded and mutilated, but rendered whole and sound by
S. Wulstan. He then became professed and lived long and honourably;
whence the verse,

Sexu privatus fit vir ; videt exoculatus.

The Tewkesbury annalist tells the same story under the same year.
Probably, however, it relates to some champion {pttgil) in a writ of
right ; but at least the case belongs to this eyre. S. Thomas a Becket had
worked a very similar miracle; the story has lately been told by INIr.
Justice Stephen (Hist. vol. i. p. 78). It may be that these horrible
sentences were not always very punctually obeyed. The allusion in the
margin of B to the Assize of Clarendon is not very intelligible ; but as
to loss of hand and foot see Assize of Northampton, sec. i.

89. Elvina gets back the bundle {saccus, fardelhim) of stolen goods,
because the thief was still seised of them when he was killed; probably
if the thief had waived them, cast them away in his flight, they would
have belonged to the king. As to the lawfulness of killing a thief com-
pare this case with 53, 362.

tulit latrocinium : the words latrociniuin and fiiriiim often
stand for the stolen goods.

92. Observe these heavy fines inflicted when there was death by mis-
adventure.

96. batellus, a boat.

99. An appeal of robbery: the substantial defence is, I am your
landlord and took the goods in distress {in nainiuni). It would probably,
however, be a mistake to suppose that this appeal, which is very
like No. 20, is adjudged null on the ground that the appellee took the
goods under a belief that he had a right to take them. The appeal is
adjudged null on proof of what happened in the county court, namely,
that the goods having been replevied, the appellor had sued for damages,
counting on the sheriflPs peace and only referred to the king's peace when
it had already been adjudged that the appellee might make his law in
proof of his not having detained against gage and pledge {cotitra vadium
et plegimn). The decision in this case and in No. 20 is not that
the appellee has not stolen, but that he has not been duly appealed.
This is an early account of replevin proceedings. County court pro-
cedure was not expeditious.

100. This case was compromised by leave of the court. In the civil
part of the roll (A. memb. 6 dors.) there is the record of an assize of
novel disseisin brought by this Samuel Ag^Lmst this Sibilla. The question
really was whether one Serlo had enfeoffed his younger son Gilbert
(Sibilla's late husband) while his elder son Samuel was in Palestine.

NOTES. 143

This is one of several cases (sec 20, 99) in which an appeal of robbery is
brought to enforce what seems a merely civil claim. The compromise
entered on the civil roll was dc omnibus placitis tain dc roberia quant
deassisa. Notice Samuel's plea that Sibilla is a married woman.

chalo, a coverlet, counterpane ; tela linea, a linen cloth ;
peplum, a wimple ? toailla, a towel.

101. This is a striking case. 'Y\v& Bassets, bearers of an honourable
name, wounded GeolTrey of Sutton at an ale. He appealed them at the
next county court and then died of his wound. His widow, Cristina,
took up the suit and pressed it in two county courts. But then a peace
{.pax) was made in the old fashion, and seemingly was sanctioned by the
sheriff; there was a marriage and a marriage settlement. The widow
discontinued her suit, and John, the son of the dead man, is one of the
jurors who say nothing about it. But it is too late in the day for this
sort of thing ; a murder is not a mere wrong. Robert, the only Basset
who appears, puts himself on a jury. The jurors and four neighbouring
townships find him guilty and he is hanged. The widow and son of the
dead man make fine. It seems, from the amercement roils, that three
other Bassets, Geoffrey, John, and Henry, paid a fine of 10 marks, and
found pledges for their appearance in case any should appeal them.

The townships which try Robert lie at the extreme east of the county,
and Sutton (under Brayles) is a detached bit of Gloucestershire, which is
surrounded by Warwickshire.

In the margin of A near the end of this case there are a few mutilated
words ; they seem to be the names of somebody's pledges, and one of
them is Josephus de INIariscis.

lOG. Ricardus homo Gaufridi is outlawed; Ricardus de la Busseye
makes fine. The latter had in 1 220 paid a mark for being bailed out to
twelve men ; he had been in prison at Gloucester, under the charge of
having slain Henry le Poer (Excerpt. Rot. Fin. p. 50).

110. Post venit et retraxit se, i.e. Robert the appellor refuses
to go on with the appeal. I now see that in A, William the appellee
makes fine.

The two fragmentary entries that follow on this in A relate to (i) a
death by misadventure, and (2) an amercement of the jurors.

desilavit eum. de equo sue, unseated him from his horse.

orbos ictus, blind blows as opposed to wounds ; see Du Cange,
ictus orbus: Bracton uses the phrase f. 144 b.

111. What in the end happened to the heroine of this queer talc I
have not been able to discover. She distinctly refused to put herself
upon a jury, but to all seeming was tried and found guilty of having com-
passed her husband's death. It will be observed that she was questioned.
The case is adjourned to Westminster for judgment ; the same course is
taken in 254. There is a writ (Rot. Glaus, vol. i. p. 383) directed to
the judges who went to Kent in 1218, bidding them adjourn ditTicult
cases : — ' You arc to decide all easy cases [loquelas planas) which come
before you, but any claims of franchises and other difficult cases {loquclas
arduas) you art to adjourn before our council [coram consilio nostra)

144 NOTES.

at Westminster.' Probably the present case is loquela ardna because
Matilda will not submit to trial.

In reckoning up in the Introduction the amount of penal justice that
had been done, I ought to have noted that criminals were sometimes
removed from the counties to London, in order that justice might there
be done upon them by the king's court. Thus, in 12 19, there is a close
writ to Ralph INIusard, bidding him send two outlaws who have been
caught to the Fleet prison under a military escort (Rot. Glaus, vol. i. pp.
396, 397), and in the next year there is a writ to the Abbot of IMalmes-
bury bidding hira hand over a thief, who has.turned approver, to INIusard
the sheriff; and then there is a writ to Musard bidding him have this
approver, and some other prisoners, before the justices at Westminster
{Ibid. pp. 428, 429.)

1 17. piletus, pilettus, the bolt of a cross-bow.

melleta, medleia, a medley, a fray ; see Diez, mischiare.

124. For some reason or other the manors of Gotherington, Wick
(Abston) and Sodbury, are privileged to behave like hundreds.

126. pependit per stiveram, hung by the stirrup.

127. Finitur sicvit patet, etc; see 301 lor the end of this case.

128. Dominus Bathoniensis {Baihon); I suppose the bishop oiB3.W\.
For other cases of clerical privilege see 168, 181, 259, 294.

The county declares the custom to be that the hundred in which the
wounded man dies pays the murdrum. So Leg. Hen. Prim. 92, § i : —
Si quis vulneratus in alium hundredum eat, et ibi moriatur, et ad mur-
drum veniat, illic persolvatur.

non levavit uteys, did not raise hue and cry.
petit curiam suam. . . . et habet, claims the right to try John in
his (the bishop's) court Ghristian, and the claim is allowed.

John is told that, even though he may make his purgation in the
bishop's court, he must keep himself within his cloister.

134. Hugh of Vivoiiia, lately constable of Bristol, was in 1221 sene-
schal of Gascony. There is a writ directing that this fine of ioo«. due
from Tiringham shall be paid to Hugh (Rot. Glaus, vol. i. p. 522 b).
The offenders in this case probably belonged to the garrison of Bristol.

149. falda, a fold, sheep-fold.

150. Both rolls begin for a while to use ejurare instead of the common
abjtcrare : though the one is not a copy of the other, they certainly are
not independent of each othei-.

Twelve years was the age at which a boy was to be brought into
frankpledge and become lawful.

154. oecasione quod debuit maledixisse, because William de la
Mare had slandered king John, at least so Gio said.

156. rederapcionem de omnibus placitis corone, ransom for all
the pleas of the crown.

161. Here Jolui distinctly refuses trial by his neighbours. The jurors
are against him, but I do not think that this is regarded as a trial. The
order first made is that he be kept in custody, but afterwards he buys the
right to find bail who will have him to right ; perhaps Isabella can go on

XOTES. 14;-;

with her appeal if she likes. I doubt whether general inferences should
be drawn from cases in which there is talk of the war time ; the judges
are making peace and have a large discretion: see 15, 35, and 181.

male attornatua, in effect this must mean maltreated ; in two other
cases (434, 455) attornare or atornare is used in the same sense. So far
as I know this is very uncommon in our law Latin, in which attornare
generally means to turn to, as when a landlord attorns his tenant to a
new landlord, or a tenant attorns himself to a new landlord ; my attorn-
atus is the attorney whom I have put in my turn. But the French have
a word more in point : —

atourner, v. a. parer, mais avec un sens de familiarite ou d'ironie
(Littrg).

atorner, parer, orner, arranger; et dans un autre sens, changer,
defigurer (Roquefort).

It seems to me that attornare or atornare in this roll means to give
a man a pretty dressing. It has been suggested to me that there has been
attraction and confusion between attornare {ad-tornare) and adornare.
See Diez, torno; Du Cange, atorna, atornare, attornare, etc.

163. in orto monialiiim, in the garden of the nuns. The word
monaliicui in the printed text should be corrected.

174. non potest dedicere, Bracton uses this same phrase in the
same context (f. 137). In theory there is here no trial at all. The
criminal who is taken in seisin of stolen goods, or in seisin of the bloody
knife {saisitiis de cnipulo sangidnolento), is seised of his crime {saisiatns
deroberia vel latrocinio, Ass. Clarend. c. izy saisittis de tnurdro vella-
trocinio velroberia vel/alsoneria, Ass. Northam. c. 3), and is not allowed
to defend himself either by his body or by his country. Bracton says that
this was constitutio antiqiiaj probably he refers to the Assizes of Clar-
endon and Northampton, which sanctioned a rule of far greater antiquity.
See also Nos. 189, 394.

175. Thomas Rochford had never, I think, been sheriff, but he was
deputy-sheriff early in John's reign. It seems to me that this tale about
the golden penny was at the least fifteen years old. Observe that two
of the four finders are dead.

181. This case illustrates what is meant by an indictment {indictamcn-
tuni). The jurors of Bradley having been charged to arrest the suspects
{malecrediti), Elias is arrested upon their indictment. He is brought
before the judges, and then these same jurors are amerced because
they know nothing against him save what happened in the war time.

182. Viridarii, the verderers.

183. This reference to a precedent is noteworthy. The judges have
got with them the rolls of the last eyre.

189. habeat judicium suum: this may be a euphemism for sus-
pendatttr. The case seems to be treated as one in which the bloody knife
makes any trial unnecessary (see 174), On the other hand, the ad
judicium in the margin looks as if judgment was not yet given, nor is it
plain to what the transgressio refers. Observe that John did not intend
to strike Peter.

L

146 NOTES.

189. uthesium, the hue and cry.

197. For more of this appeal see 401.

200. Probably this means that there is no mtirdnim, because the
deed was done in time of war, and that though it was not done by
soldiers, this makes no difference. Little stress should be laid on such
words as et, set, ideo.

205. berkeria, a sheep-fold.

209. Giles of Braose was bishop of Hereford from 1200 to 12 16; he
was succeeded by Hugh of Mapenore, who in 1219 was succeeded by
Hugh Foliot. Giles was the only bishop who took part against John in
the war ; he had cruel wrongs to revenge. The place in which he set
up his gallows was seemingly a common pasture, but the phrase in
commtinia pasho'a is queer.

210. tresturnavit. In Britton (vol. i. p. 81) one of the inquiries of
the eyre is des coicrs des ewes trestournez, of watercourses diverted.
I can find no authority for what I take to be antetresturmtin, but it
must mean a rediversion, a turning back to the old course.

213. This is the clearest case that there is on this roll against trying,
or rather against punishing, those who do not submit themselves to trial.
Apparently William, Alexafider, and Agnes have as full a trial as any
accused person ever has. The jurors and the three townships declare
them guilty ; but Alexander and Agnes merely remain in gaol, while
William is, 1 think, let out on bail, though this last fact is left somewhat
obscure. (The words ' committatur . . . vicecomiti ' must, I think, be a
postscript overriding the order that William is to be kept in gaol.) For
this B expressly gives the reason that these people did not put themselves
upon their country; see 229.

et pater suus fuit conseneiens, 1 take it that paler suus is
Willelmus pater Alexandri.

216. Britton says that one guilty of arson is to be burnt, vol. i. p. 41.
Mr. Nichols, in his note on the passage, refers, thi-ough Sir Samuel
Clarke's Fleta (p. 36), to this very case of William Miller, which seems
to be the one known case in point. Observe that the county court had
the king's writ authorizing this punishment.

grangia, a barn, a grange.

217. The county is careful to state that Peter was caught in posses-
sion of the stolen lambs, and that the owners made suit. Probably
without this the county court would have had no jurisdiction (Bracton,
f. 150 b).

The jurors' false presentment may consist in this, that they did not
say what became of Osbert after he was committed to Jordan Scotmodi.
For more of this Jordan Scotmodi see 246.

220. rettum, accusation.

225. tria frustra vitri, three pieces of glass.

228. bidentes, sheep. The four vills are Horsley, Woodchester,
Rodmarton, and Tetbury.

229. Seemingly another case, in which a man is tried and found guilty
by the jurors and four townships, but is merely left in custody because

NOTES. 147

he has not put himself on his country (see 213). It is to be noticed,
however, that the jurors do not know to whom the sheep belonged.

In this case it seems clear that the jurors, who say on their oath that
they know William to be a thief, are the same jurors upon whose indict-
ment he was captured. Perhaps this means that these jurors, in obedience
to the instructions given to them at the beginning of the eyre, had
arrested William, or perhaps they had given in his name to the justices,
and the justices had ordered his arrest. See Bracton, f. 116, and com-
pare No. 181. The four vills are Lechlade, Southrop, Hatherop, and
Kempsford in the south-east corner of the county.

231. faleisia, a rock, a bank.

241. captus pro male retto, arrested because of his ill repute.

ipse est cruce signatus, he is a crusader, has taken the
cross.

243. The thief having been caught with the stolen goods on him, the
Earl of Gloucester, who had much land round Tewkesbury, claims the
privilege of trying and hanging him ; the claim is allowed, and the thief
is handed over.

241. The jurors seem to be presenting what has happened since the
session at Gloucester began. Observe how emphatically B states the
duty of the husband to produce his offending wife.

246. Observe that the whole county testifies against/f r^cj/z Scotmodi.

249. jTXxta divisas, near the boundary.

253. ante horam vesperam. It became law, as recited by a statute
of 1487 (3 Hen. 7, c. i), that 'if any man be slain in the day, and the
felon not taken, the township where the death or murder is done shall
be amerced.' This rule, which is stated as still existing law by both
Coke (3 Inst. 53) and Hale (P. C. vol. i. p. 448), and which has never
been abolished, must be distinguished both from the rule about the
murder-fine which fell on the hundred, and the rule about frank-pledge.
It cannot be traced to any known act of legislation, and the only old
authorities about it in print are some of Fitzherbert's scraps. It may,
however, be very old, and deserves a share of the attention which his-
torians pay to frank-pledge. There is nothing in this roll very decisive
about it, but we may note that the very commonest form of presentment
begins, ' INIalefactores venerunt de 7tocie,ttc., et occiderunt, etc.; ' probably
the words de node are material.

254. Thehundredorsof Holeford had already charged this William de
la Chambre with this murder (see above No. 35), and the story was not
new, for already, in 12 18, the king had enjoyed his year and day in
William's land, William having fled for the crime ; see Rot. Glaus,
vol. i. p. 377. I have not been able to discover what became of him.
Apparently the Earl Marshall is ready to establish an alibi, and certainly
the story told by the jurors is almost too circumstantial to be true.

capud. fill, the end of the string.
259. Silvester of Evesham was elected bishop of Worcester in April,
12 16, and died in June, 12 18.
2G0. From the corrections in A it would seem that the jurors origin-
L 2

14^ NOTES.

ally presented this case as one of robbery, but Katharine asks only for a
civil remedy.

2G0. heredis sui, Katharine's daughter, who perhaps has been
abducted and married.

et ideo ibi rectum habeat, she may seek her remedy in a
civil action, -^ placitum terre et heredis sui.

261. The judges seem to exercise a power of pardoning even in grave
cases.

264, Roger the approver is hanged because his appeal is informal ; he
does not say that Thomas was his fellow. Bracton (f. 153) says that
the approver's appeal must set forth all the circumstances of the case.
Thomas, who is in frank-pledge, is bailed to his pledges; Adam, the other
appellee, is not in frank-pledge and so has to abjure the realm. This is
in close accordance with the law laid down by Bracton (f. 152-154).
camisia, a shirt ; braccae, breeches ; wimpla, a wimple,
seductor domini regis, seemingly this is a charge of treason ;
see Bracton, f, 118, b. (ed. Twiss, vol. ii. p. 258) and Emlyn's note to
Hale, P. C. vol. i. p. 77.

274. According to B the four shillings due as deodand were paid
coram ptsticiariis in bafico. Does this necessarily mean that the pay-
ment was made, not at Gloucester, but at Westminster ? If so, this is an
instance of a late postscript.

280. Dominus Bathoniensis is, I suppose, the bishop of Bath (see 128).

It is carefully noted that the men who were hanged were hanged for
theft, and not for murder, and that they were taken ctcm furtis. This
is probably another instance of county court jurisdiction over hand-
having thieves.

289. It seems probable, though of course not certain, that this case
comes from the shrievalty of Richard Mucegros. He may have had
the chattels in some other character than that of sheriff. Hugh Neville,
for instance, had been custodian of the forest of Dean, and his servant
had become possessed of some of Arnold's goods. It should be noted,
however, that three of the persons concerned are already dead.

Pollard had been accused (rettaius) of adultery with Johanna, prob-
ably in the Court Christian. It is not easy to see why Johanna should
be fined for the death of her lover, whose death had displeased, not
pleased, her.

runcinus, a rouncey, a horse.

294. Walo, or Gualo, was the famous legate ; Silvester was the bishop
of Worcester (1216-1218) ; Robert of Berkeley died in 1220. Not im-
possibly this case preserves a trace of the interdict during which little
respect was paid to the privilege of clergy. For more of Gualo see 372.

295. Hugh of Vivofiia had been constable of Bristol.

296. Lucia is probably the widow of Robert of Berkeley, called
Leticia below (see 308).

301. This David of IVestburj has been already mentioned (see 127).
The townsfolk of Almondsbury ought to have watched the church, to
prevent David's escape.

NOTES. 149

inflrgatus, infirgiatus, fettered.

308. The widow of the king's tenant in chief ought not to marry
without the king's licence (see John's charter, c. 8). A heavy fine is
imposed, but the lady was wealthy.

310. Roger refuses to put himself on the neighbourhood, but never-
theless is hanged. 1 am not sure, however, that the case supports the
general proposition that a man can be tried if he refuses trial. Roger
had broken his fetters {firgias) and run to a church, and this may be
treated as equivalent to that seisin of a crime which makes an inquest
unnecessary (see 174). Stress is laid on the fact that Roger left the
church voluntarily, because, if he had been dragged from it, then he
must have been put back again into his sanctuary. Probably in coiivcii-
cione omncs habcnt cum suspechini merely means all ivith one accord
suspect him ; for tc7ia voce used with the same meaning see 394 and 414.

324. Seemingly a question arises whether the abbot is bound to pro-
duce a servant whom he has merely hired by the day ; see Bracton 124 b,
as to who constitute a man's mainpast.

328. The trial by jury is noticeable, because Walter is not charged
with any felony.

330. Here again the accused refuses trial by jury ; but the testimony
of the jurors and of the townships is taken, and they say that he is
guilty, giving as one reason for their belief that he \\\\\ not submit to
trial. Unfortunately his mistress, Petronilla, interferes and buys him
permission to abjure the realm.

ad bvirricas ; bnricjis, burrmis, a horse or donkey ; the French
keep the feminine bonrrique for a donkey: see Ducange, <5/^;7«^j^ ; Diez,
burro.

et habet dies, etc., and he has as his days (i. e. as the days within
which he must sail) one month from the 19th of July.

331. de quodam halimoto, from a hallmoot, a manorial court.

332. Four persons have been slain by burglars, and this is adjudged
misadventure. A similar statement is made in 352, Surely the clerks
are blundering.

337. No judgment is given, possibly on the ground that Henry the
Second's charter privileges the monks of Flaxley from being impleaded
before the justices in eyre. For instances of charters containing similar
clauses see Brunner, pp. 409-410; they are from Normandy,
mora, a moor,
per bundas et per metas, by metes and bounds.

342. pro retonsione denariorum, for clipping coins.

357. The hundred-jury of Blidesloe is sent back to reconsider its ver-
dict, and the jurors are warned to have a care for themselves. They
come back at 388. The words veredichini siiinn ei conimittitur cer-
tainly suggest that the answers to the articles were in writing.

3G2. Thomas Roscelin, it seems, killed two she-thieves {latronisse)
when they were about to burgle a house, and this he did se defendendo.
Apparently it is considered that for such an act a pardon must be
obtained. As to this see Stephen, Hist. vol. iii. p. 36 fol.

i5o NOTES.

I have in vain tried to discover the date of this case ; it would fix the
date of the last eyre in Gloucestershire.

362. languidus et in litera, sick and in a litter.

372. For another case in which Gnalo the legate delivered a prisoner
see 294. In the present case it does not appear that the prisoner was
a clerk.

378. Hugo le Chevaler and Hugo Miles are of course the same
person.

379. The words marked as conjectural are based upon the amerce-
ment roll, p. 135.

testatum fuit vieecomiti, it was testified by the sheriff (?).

383. Henry de Vere had held a gaol delivery (see 374), but when I
do not know. The ordeal of water {judicmm ague) was still in use.

394. This case has been transcribed from A by Palgrave (Common-
wealth, p. clxxxvii), and made known to all by Mr. Justice Stephen
(Hist. vol. i. p. 259). I find that I have supposed myself to have read
what Sir Francis Palgrave left unread, namely, the interlineation in A,
which seems to be preterqtimn de visu. A number of persons say that
they saw one William kill the other. The four townships attest the
same fact, but cannot say that they actually saw it. The words, if I am
right about them, are of some little interest.

The criminal was taken in the act, holding the weapon with which he
did the deed, so there is no need for him to submit to trial. Indeed
he cannot do so, non potest defendere. For similiar cases see 174, 189.

396. The complicated story seems to be this. Walter killed William
and was outlawed. Walter's brother Adam was, or was said to have
been, appealed by Jacob and by Martin. Jacob's appeal is backed by
Henry Bigod and Henry Nesse, and Martin's appeal is backed by Hugh
Chark, that is to say, these persons were desirous of fighting if Jacob or
Martin died or made default. (As to contingent and supplementary
appeals of this kind see Bracton, f. 138 ; evidently the phrase si de A.B.
male contigerit was the technical phrase proper to be used in such sub-
sidiary appeals). When, however, it comes to the point, Jacob with-
draws his appeal, confessing it was groundless. He has to pay a fine of
40' and find twelve sureties that he will keep the peace. His backers,
the two Henries, do not appear, and a capias goes against them. Then
Martin denies that he ever appealed Adam ; the coroners' rolls, how-
ever, show that he did, and the order is that he and his backer Hugh be
kept in custody. Then, however, the county contradicts the coroners
and says that Martin never appealed Adam, and so Martin (the rolls
say Walter, but this is a mistake) and Hugh go quit. It is noticeable
that the judges believe the county rather than the coroners' rolls ; as to
this see Bracton, f. 140 b.

As to Adam, there is now no appeal against him, but he pays a sub-
stantial sum for an inquest and is acquited. Seemingly he is tried by
the twelve jurors of Blidesloe, the same jurors who are amerced for not
having presented the appeals. What would have happened to him if he
had not made the payment? It seems probable that the testimony of

NOTES. J51

the jurors would have been taken, and, being favourable to him, he would
have gone quit. Still it may well have been prudent to give the king
ten marks. (See 343 and John's Charter, c. 36).

gratis optulit se, etc., he voluntarily surrendered himself a pri-
soner as one willing to stand his trial {stare redo).

404. crannoc, erennock, a measure ; but what measure, and whence
the name .? See Ducange, crannocics, crannoca.

405. The variance between A and B might suggest that Gio de
Cigogne and Gio de Chanceaux were the same person ; but the clause
in John's charter which banishes them makes it clear that they were
distinct.

412. This entry has been made on roll A in large bold characters.
Apparently these four persons had been coroners for some time past.
Afterwards (465) Hugh of Cullardvill fines to be removed from his office,
and seemingly there is a new election.

414. Roger had often impounded {impure aver at) Henry's beasts
{averia). Compare 416, in which another death has followed from a
like cause. Henry refuses trial, but to all appearance has a trial in the
regular form and is found guilty ; he pays a fairly heavy fine and is
bailed. Apparently no more will happen to him unless some one
appeals him {si qtds versus cum loqui voliterit). He is very leniently
treated ; I think that he has a powerful friend who finds the 60*
for him.

415. This deodand upon condition is curious. The judges must
have had a large discretion in these matters. The Lanthoney Abbey
often mentioned in this roll is of course the Abbey close to Gloucester,
not the Abbey in Wales.

fugare carucam, to follow a plough.
gu.tta caduca, the falling drop, epilepsy.
419. Probably it was for military purposes that the Earl Marshall
cleared Gloucester castle of its prisoners.

434. Observe that this story is about twelve years old, per qiiandam
diem domifiicain que f nit per tres septimaiias ante Natale. This use
of per seems very strange, but I can make nothing else of the text ;
compare per duos annos in 362.

litigaverunt adinvicem, probably this fine phrase only means
that there was a dispute. The phrase is again used in 436.

Et quesitus quam sectam ipse fecit ; the inquiry must be
made of Hugh the appellor, not of Peter the appellee.

Peter is compelled to go to the duel although he wants an inquisition
de odio. It seems plain that he has no right to choose trial per patriate
instead of trial per corpus. Observe that he does not offer to pay for
an inquest ; could he have bought one ?
The day for the duel is the 31st of July.

435. This is the last of the cases in which trial is refused. It seems that
the accused was admitted to bail; see 503, note 4, and the fine on p. 133.

Since the Introduction to this book was written I have seen, in the
note-book discovered by Professpr Vinogradoff, two important cases

152 NOTES.

touching the question what shall be done with a man who will not put
himself upon his country ^ They are extracted from a roll that I can-
not find in the Record Office ; they came before the bench at West-
minster almost directly after the end of this eyre, namely, in the spring

of 12 22.

/ In the first case one John is accused of robbery and refuses to put
himself upon his country. But he was found seised of a coat made of two
pieces {inventus est seisitus de una tunica partita)., and one half of this
had belonged to a certain Walter. All the men of the township recog-
nise the coat, and all the men of the county and of the neighbourhood
testify that John is a thief. And so, because John was not within the
assize of our lord the king-, and cannot deny the coat {jion potest dedi-
cere tunicam), and has no lord who will replevy him, and there is
nothing in his favour [et Ofnnia bona ei deficiunt), it is adjudged that he
Xis convicted and therefore, etc. There is no need to expand this etc.
The next case is in many respects similar ; one Hugh., accused of har-
bouring thieves, refuses trial, and is not in frank-pledge. All the town-
ships and all the knights of the county testify that he is guilty, and he
cannot find pledges ; therefore he is committed to gaol in the custody
of the sheriflT.

Now over against the first case the annotator has written : — De eo
qui noluit se ponere super patriam set inventus fuit seisitus de latrocinio,
et omnia bona defecerunt ei quia non in franco plegio, nee habuit
dominum qui eum advocaret et ideo. (The sentence is unfinished, but
there is no need to finish it.)

The note against the second case is : — Alius eodem modo rettatus set
non de aliquo seisitus, et malecreditus, noluit se ponere super patriam et
ideo committatur gaole quia non potuit invenire plegios.

The one distinction that the annotator sees between the two cases is
that in the one there is seisin, and in the other not. Whether these two
cases finally committed the court to the doctrine that, when there is no
seisin, a man cannot be tried unless he consents to be tried, remains to
be seen. The rolls of 122 1 apparently show that the matter was then
in the greatest doubt.

Having had occasion to mention this note-book, I must add that, quite
apart from any question as to who the annotator was, — a question that is
at present in the best hands, — there can be no doubt at all that a very
substantial addition to the materials for our legal history has been made
by its discovery.

449. Two leaden coffins, full of bones, have been found ; a present of
them is made to the lepers.

450. The end of this entry is rather obscure, but I think it means that
Richard Burgess (who had long been the deputy, or under-sheriff"), is

. accountable to the king for the felon's chattels, and for the king's year

frank-pledge; see Bracton, f. 153 b, 1. 2.

NOTES. 153

and day in the felon's land, and that the land is to be given up to the
Abbot of Gloucester, the felon's lord. In 454 there is another escheat
of land propter delictum tenentis. Now it is a question of some little
importance whether land in Gloucester would escheat propter delictum,
because this bears on a very interesting and unsolved problem in our
legal history, the origin and value of the so-called statute, Prerogativa
Regis. According to that document (cap. 16) it is said (dicitur) that
the lands of felons in Gloucester (the English translation says in the
cou7ity of Gloucester, but the Latin text does not bear this out) do not
escheat, and in Kent, ' the father to the bough, and the son to the plough.'
As to Kent, it it is well known that the exception became admitted
law (Hale, P. C. vol. i, p. 360). In some way or another Kentishmen suc-
ceeded in persuading the judges that they had many peculiar customs
of their own, e. g. that there was no villeinage in Kent. But I am not
aware that any notice has ever been paid to what is said in the Prerog-
ativa about Gloucester. It will not be out of place to add that this
would-be statute refers, for the sake of illustration, to two cases that
must have happened in Henry the Third's reign. The one concerns John
of Monmouth, who was one of the judges at Gloucester in 1221, the
other concerns Anselm Marshall, the youngest son of the great earl, and
the brother of the William INIarshall who was at Gloucester in 1221, The
Prerogativa would well repay a careful investigation.

452. The town of Gloucester has to answer for this escape from its
gaol, for the gaol is its gaol, since Walter Long the keeper of it is not
the owner, and has no fee in his office. The gaola ville is different
from the castrum domini regis (435).

453. How did the Earl Marshall come by these chattels ? Does the
story go back to his shrievalty ?

459. The castellans of Gloucester used, on the first day for the sale of
beer, to take 28 gallons (lagenas) from every brew, paying two-pence
for them : they either paid the money down, or gave a tally {tallia, dica)
for it, and so long as the tally remained in the hands of the woman, (for
of course the person who brews is a woman,) they could take no more
beer from her. But Rochford introduced the practices of taking two-
pence when he took no beer, of taking beer on the last day as well as on
the first day of sale, and of taking beer from those who still held out-
standing tallies.

461. The charter of Henry the Second, granting this watercourse, is
printed in the Chartulary of Gloucester Abbey (Rolls' series), vol.i. p.
155 ; see also vol. ii. p. 186 for a (?) grant of the same by William the
Conqueror.

4Go. As to the coroners, see above, 412. Apparently the town of
Gloucester has no coroners of its own ; Bristol has.

466. et ideo habeat judicium suuin; doubtless this means sttspen-
datur: see 189.

471. Robert of Roppelay, whose heir answers for chattels here and in
481, had been constable of Bristol before Gerard of Ath^e ; he was
superseded in 1208 : see also 503.

154 NOTES.

472. This is the only satisfactory bit of hanging that is recorded. It
is not clear when or by whom it was done.

480. ne oecasionentvir, that occasion may not be taken against them,
that the judges will not be extreme to mark what they say or do amiss.
This is a fine for beauplcadcr, pro pulchre placitando. These fines
became a great popular grievance. At the Parliament of Oxford com-
plaint was made against them : — 'justiciarii capiunt finem gravem pro
pulchro placitando de quolibet comitatu ne occasionetur.' Probably the
fine paid by the burgesses of Gloucester (464) is of the same kind.
Gloucester pays £^, Bristol, £10. See Stat. Marlb. c. n.

481. An appeal by a sister for her brother's death. 'Nullus capiatur
nee imprisonetur propter appellum foeminae de morte alterius quam viri
sui' (John's charter, cap. 54; and see Bracton, f. 148, b). But this
appeal was begun before the charter was granted.

486. Note that Bristol claims to be outside the police system of frank-
pledge, yet seemingly does not rely on a charter.

496. debuit hoc feeisse, it was said that a certain vintner of Reading
did this, at least so the story went. For a similar use of debeo, see 154,
debuit inaledixisse de domino rege.

498. Certain lands had been taken into the king's hand, in distress for
land-tax, they were lying waste, no one was making suit for them, or
claiming them as his fee.

499. Many persons had made quays by the water-side, but according
to ancient custom, and without doing damage to any.

I think that B gives kaias, but A kaios ; the former would, I suppose
be the better reading ; see Du Cange, caya ; Skeat, qtiay ; the word
seems to be of Celtic origin.

500. The woad-mongers used to pile up the woad in the quarter
measure above its brim, now they only fill the measure to the level of
the brim ; this new practice was begun in the days of Peter of Chanceaux,
constable of Bristol.

Compare the assize of measures in Hoveden, vol. iv. p. 33: ' et
haec mensura sit rasa tam in civitatibus et burgis quam extra.'

502. The complaint seems to be this : — of old the constables were
entitled to buy four meses of herrings at a price two-pence less than
that charged to others, but since Gerard's day they have exacted two
shillings, or even more, for every last of herrings sold ; we admit the old
custom, but ask relief against the new.

According to the ordinance of weights and measures, of unknown
date, which is in the statute book (vol. i. p. 204), the last of red her-
rings is twelve thousand. As to the mesa, or messa, of herrings, see
Du Cange, mesa, meisa: he gives several French authorities for the
word : seemingly it was a much smaller quantity than the last ; one
French ordinance fixes it at 1020 for red herrings, and a smaller number
for white.

503. At the time of the Michaelmas fair merchants used to be
allowed to sell heavy goods, wool, hides, iron, woad, outside the fair ;
but now, for some time past, the constables of Bristol castle have imposed

NOTES. 155

arbitrary fines on sales made outside the fair ; they take a pound of
pepper or even more.

501. The tenants of the templars at Redcliff have been playing the
part of the bat in the fable ; when the judges were in Somerset (121 8-9)
they claimed to be Gloucestershire men, and were allowed to depart;
now that the eyre is in Gloucestershire they want to be Somerset
men.

50G. As to the other articles of the e)re, the jurors can only report
some deaths by misadventure.

THE AMERCEMENT ROLLS.

In the foot-notes I have tried to connect the amercements with the
cases in respect of which they were inflicted. There are a few that I
cannot explain, and there are a good many cases in which the liability
to an amercement has been declared, but no amercement is actually
imposed. I imagine that the judges had a wide discretion in this matter,
and that many excuses were accepted. It should be noted also that,
according to the old authorities, the murder fine was the heavy sum of
46 marks, or nearly ^31 ; about this the Leges Edwardi, Willelmi,
Henrici Primi agree : but as a matter of fact, in this roll a hundred, no
matter how many murders there may be against it, pays for them all
with a comparatively trifling sum.

G56^P5

Gloucester, Eng.

Pleas of the Crown for
the County of Gloucester

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

«

I